[ENH] revisions to @oesteban's Alternative proposal to BEP038 (#1)
oesteban/bids-specification: src/derivatives/atlas.md

     and the template is NOT serving as the authoritative definition of a space.
-    [`cohort-<label>`](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) is REQUIRED to disambiguate derivatives defined with
     respect to different cohort instances.
     Please note that [`cohort-<label>`](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) MUST NOT be used if neither
     [`tpl-<label>`](../glossary.md#template-entities) nor [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities)
     nor [`atlas-<labl>`](../glossary.md#atlas-entities) are used.
-    [`seg-<label>`](../glossary.md#segmentation-entities) is REQUIRED when a single atlas has several different
     realizations (for instance, segmentations and parcellations created with different criteria) that
     need disambiguation.
-    [`scale-<label>`](../glossary.md#scale-entities) is REQUIRED to disambiguate different atlas 'scales',
     when the atlas has more than one 'brain unit' resolutions, typically relating to the area covered
     by regions.

The general filename pattern for subject-level derivatives with templates and atlases 
follows the general BIDS-Derivatives pattern:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<label>/
        <datatype>/

>             <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_cohort-<label>][_atlas-<label>][_template-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer: a template entity should not be introduced, but rather use the tpl entity?

Author: Yes, good catch.  I've reworked this so that it uses the `tpl` entity, and to clarify that one can either use the tpl entity, atlas entity, but not both.

respect to individual or template brains that are supported by spaces
such as surfaces and regular grids (images).

> The organization follows the standards for BIDS raw and derivatives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For derivatives with atlases in their provenance corresponding to individual subjects,
the organization follows the standards for BIDS raw and derivatives.
```

How can this be removed? Perhaps what's missing is some more explicit bridge between individual subjects and group (template) specifications, but that doesn't mean that, when you are working with individual subjects you still use sub-[...] structures like the BIDS raw&derivatives specs.

The following entities MAY be employed to specify template- and atlas-derived results:

-    [`tpl-<label>`](../glossary.md#template-entities) is REQUIRED to specify derivatives defining

>      a [template](../common-principles.md).  MUST NOT be used alongside `atlas-<label>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     a [template](../common-principles.md).
```
We have not introduced atlas- yet, so this admonition feels too preemptive

> -    [`atlas-<label>`](../glossary.md#atlas-entities) is REQUIRED to specify derivatives defining an [atlas](../common-principles.md).  MUST NOT be used alongside `template-<label>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
1- Why moving from below? It feels more clear to me the current ordering of description (1- template, 2- space, 3- cohort, 4- atlas). The reason for that is, to me, the difference between template and space is the more subtle/finicky, then cohort is necessary for template and space, and finally atlas depends on the three of them.

2- `template-<label>` - you mean `tpl-<label>` ? If so, I don't see how atlas- can be used without tpl-.

Reviewer: Thanks for these changes, @oesteban, and let's have a meeting soon to discuss this further. @pwighton - please correct me if I am wrong, but I think @pwighton is arguing that an atlas is currently defined as being a segmentation (defined on a template), while tpl is a an averaged feature map (i.e. template) across subjects. Therefore, it may seem unintuitive to have both tpl- and atlas- in the filename, as it cannot both be a feature map and a segmentation? The space entity would reconcile how atlas- can be used without tpl-. But if tpl- serves the same role as space- then having tpl- and atlas- in the name still makes sense, but is then an atlas and not a template.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that was the understanding I arrived at later (https://github.com/oesteban/bids-specification/pull/1#discussion_r1879828149).

As I argue there, the data type (whether an average feature map or a segmentation) in BIDS is expressed by the suffix. This use of atlas- is just reflecting some suffixes, and leaving tpl- for others, which is counter-productive because we have suffix that fully expresses this (and conflicting with BIDS, which doesn't change sub- depending on the suffix).

I think the best way to approach this is through the homology/analogy between subject and template and between session and cohort. If we cannot agree on that mapping, hardly we're going to find a common place for atlas.

Author: > I think the best way to approach this is through the homology/analogy between subject and template and between session and cohort. If we cannot agree on that mapping, hardly we're going to find a common place for atlas.

I've raised this point previously, but dropped it because it didn't seem critical, but it looks like it will be.  Cohort in the biological sciences generally means "a set of subjects who satisfy a set of inclusion criteria" and while this can be used to denote a session or timepoint, e.g. "subjects who have been imaged between Jan and Dec 2024",  it can be used for other things as well, e.g "Subjects who were born before 1980" or "Subjects who have a BMI less than 20" or "Subjects who speak Italian".

Here are how some other controlled terminologies define cohort:

"In OHDSI research, we define a cohort as a set of persons who satisfy one or more inclusion criteria for a duration of time." [1]

"A group of individuals who share a common exposure, experience or characteristic or a group of individuals followed-up or traced over time in a cohort study. [AMA Manual of Style]" [2]

"Cohort Study: Observational study that assembles a large group of individuals, collects extensive information about
these people at baseline, and follows up with the group for a period of time in an attempt to examine
relationships between outcomes and risk factors." [3]

[1]: https://ohdsi.github.io/TheBookOfOhdsi/Cohorts.html
[2]: https://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CDISC/Glossary/CDISC%20Glossary.html
[3]: https://ismpp.memberclicks.net/assets/docs/Committees/updated%20glossary_final_0716.pdf

Reviewer 2: Sure, the homology is scoped within BIDS:

tpl- works like sub- (and also provides a reference frame for the results within the folder tpl-<label>/ like sub-<label>/)
cohort- works like session- (and also provides a grouping mechanism within the corresponding folder)

beyond that, this mapping does not intend to make cohorts an equivalent to sessions.

-    [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities) is REQUIRED to disambiguate derivatives defined with
     respect to different [coordinate systems](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md), following the general

>      BIDS-Derivatives specifications.  It is also REQUIRED when [`tpl-<label>`](../glossary.md#template-entities) is used,
>      and the template is NOT serving as the authoritative definition of a space.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for bringing this up, I feel you just made clear a blind spot in my way to think about templates and I really appreciate it :)

First as a note, please use semantic break lines following the rest of the specs, they are easier to read and review.

If I managed to understand the intent, then I think this phrasing would be more unambiguous:

```suggestion
     BIDS-Derivatives specifications. 
     Like for individual subject-derivatives, [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities)
     specifies a new authoritative coordinate system and, although data derive from
     a particular subject, they are spatially referred to the space designated by the entity.
     This means that the data labeled with [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities)
     were originally defined with the subject's scanner coordinates as the authoritative coordinate
     system and were then *projected* or *resampled* on [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities).
     For example, `sub-01_space-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_T1w.nii.gz` indicates that the
     T<sub>1</sub>-weighted (T1w) image originally defined in subject 01's scanner coordinates
     has been resampled into `MNI152NLin2009cAsym` coordinates, what is typically
     referred to as *a subject's T1w spatially standardized into MNI space*.
     This naturally extends to the case of templates.
     For example, `tpl-OASIS30ANTs_space-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_T1w.nii.gz` indicates that the
     T<sub>1</sub>-weighted average map originally defined in `OASIS30ANTs` coordinates
     has been resampled into `MNI152NLin2009cAsym` coordinates.
```

@effigies please double check the above makes sense :)

Reviewer: I think defining where and at what time the averaging takes place is still tricky to define and make solid requirements for. For example, for PET data we usually 1) project the 4D PET to e.g. fsaverage (using anatomical data, i.e. sub-XX_space-fsaverage_pet.nii.gz), 2) smooth the data along the cortical surface, and then 3) perform kinetic modeling to produce binding estimates. We then average these binding estimates across subjects (i.e. sub becomes tpl to create a new template existing in fsaverage space). This process works well because it respects individual cortical boundaries by registering individual surfaces to fsaverage. It would instead be suboptimal to first volumetrically smooth each individual data in subject space, produce binding estimates, register all subjects to e.g. the first subject, average the binding estimates across subjects to produce a new template, and then register that template to e.g. fsaverage. But ultimately, the outcome of these two workflows would be the same i.e. average binding estimates across a set of subjects in fsaverage space. But in the first case, this might be considered an atlas on top of tpl-fsaverage (i.e. tpl-fsaverage_atlas-PET_pet.nii.gz) or a new template since we are averaging across subjects (i.e. tpl-PET_space-fsaverage_pet.nii.gz), whereas for the second case it might be considered a template in fsaverage space (i.e. tpl-PET_space-fsaverage_pet.nii.gz). Now if I define a novel PET parcellation/atlas based on this, I would have tpl-fsaverage_atlas-PET_probseg/dseg.nii.gz for case 1 (i.e. only the suffix datatype changes), and for case 2 it would be tpl-PET_space-fsaverage_atlas-PET_probseg/dseg.nii.gz.

In my humble opinion, I suggest that when averaging is taking place for a new datatype e.g. pet (instead of T1w) and a new set of subjects in either a new or already defined space, this becomes a new template existing in that defined space. A new segmentation/atlas may then subsequently be defined on top of this (with a dseg/probseg extension), and will therefore also belong to a specific template and a specific space.

Reviewer 2: Your example seems to me like pretty clearly belonging to ``tpl-fsaverage`` (and your second paragraph is consistent with the changes you made in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1856/commits/891bcf01bd9638e37909302c02c314e5648a3c27, which I was planning to respond in our meeting but then got distracted and did not mention.

HOWEVER, there was a point in the meeting where we touched base on this. What we said is, considering that, even though you are working in fsaverage coordinates you are not the original originator of fsaverage, then we should recommend that a new template identifier (such as PS13) is issued.

In the `dataset_description.json` then we should clearly indicate that the new template is in fact aligned with fsaverage. If that is the case, then `sub-01_hemi-L_space-PS13_PET.gii` becomes absolutely equivalent to `sub-01_hemi-L_space-fsaverage_PET.gii`, in both cases signifying PET data on a surface defined in fsaverage/PS13 space, which is the same.

We could (and I like the idea a lot) enforce that space is present in the filenames if the new template does not generate its own coordinate system (which is what @pwighton was basically pointing us at):

```
tpl-PS13/
    tpl-PS13_space-MNI152Lin_T1w.nii.gz
```
This example tells you that you generated a T1w average (whether in a custom space of the study or you moved everything to MNI152Lin should be found in some provenance metadata and/or a paper) that is not the one distributed with MNI152Lin, but in this case it is aligned with that space.

The generation of new template identifiers can be recommended in that case, but this has effects to things like TemplateFlow more than the specification itself. BIDS can perfectly live without this recommendation, nor the combination of tpl- and space- in this use-case.

Why?
- For BIDS, the specification disallowing generating new template identifiers if they are really defined in a different, existing template space, would work as-is. It tells you how to organize the data and the organization is absolutely valid.
- TemplateFlow and other potential services care about the ownership and access rights of stakeholders. At the moment, the developers of TemplateFlow regulate that, but, if it were a "proper" registry, we should not modify say fsaverage adding PS13 when the authors are not exactly the same or the scope of fsaverage is not to cover PS13.

That said, this is already creating difficulties in understanding, so I believe BIDS should observe these nuances and I think adding these mechanisms is a good thing for the spec. But again, it's more a problem of data ownership/access/stewardship than it is of nomenclature or organization.

Happy to work through examples in the call if necessary.

Reviewer: Thanks for this reply, @oesteban, and looking forward to work through some of the examples in our call tomorrow. Researching a bit on how already existing T1w templates were generated (https://www.lead-dbs.org/about-the-mni-spaces/) e.g. MNI152 NLIN 2009, 152 brains were nonlinearly registered into 305 space (i.e. MNI305) and then averaged to create a new template i.e. MNI152 NLIN 2009. So I think this conflicts a bit with the current notion that averaging should take place in a new space defined by the 152 brains and not in an already defined template space, as the MNI152 NLIN 2009 template would otherwise not be a new template, but instead either 1) an atlas tpl-MNI305_atlas-MNI152NLIN2009_T1.nii.gz, or 2) a new template defined in an already existing space tpl-MNI152NLIN2009_space-MNI305_T1w.nii.gz. In the PS13 case, alternatively, this should just be a new template tpl-PS13_pet.nii.gz. But adding the space entity seems necessary to differentiate between different output spaces e.g. fsaverage or MNI305?

Reviewer 2: It so happens that fsaverage IS MNI305 with an adjustment of an offset in the through-plane (Z) direction :D.

I'm aware of what you mean, however, the difference between MNI305 and MNI152NLin2009cAsym (and variants) is that the alignment into MNI305 is linear, and a new anatomical reference and registration method where employed (nonlinear, since 2006).

Because the registration is nonlinear, I would be confident to call MNI152NLin2009cAsym a new template w.r.t. MNI305.

Let's pick fsaverage, MNI305 and PS13.

PS13 *is* in fsaverage so long the spatial transform between PS13's maps/surfaces/etc. and fsaverage is identity. However, between MNI305 and fsaverage there is a translation and therefore the transform is not identity.

Between MNI305 and MNI152NLin2009cAsym, the linear part of the transform is identity, but the nonlinear part of the transform (which is not released by MNI because they probably did not even calculate it, I would have not calculated it) is not identity.

Now, I'm going to give you ammo to fire at my argument. Okay, the transform between MNI152NLin2009aAsym, MNI152NLin2009bAsym, MNI152NLin2009cAsym *is* the identity.

-> Yes, but in this case, I believe we can apply the principle explained above and allow them to be separate. Alternatively, we can change (which is not backward compatible) BIDS' existing designation of some standard spaces so that a, b, and c versions of 2009 become just MNI152NLin2009Asym.

Reviewer: Thanks, @oesteban - I think your take on this is really helpful. For the PS13 example (and other PET examples in general), we generate the average feature map using often a volumetric stream and a surface-based stream. For the volumetric stream, we have used CVS registration (https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/mri_cvs_register) estimating and applying a nonlinear registration from subject space to a CVSMNI152 template provided by FreeSurfer. After this registration, the data is averaged across subjects. To me, this aligns with https://www.lead-dbs.org/about-the-mni-spaces/ stating 'MNI152 NLIN 6th generation: Here, the 152 brains were nonlinearly registered into 305 space. Again, only a T1 template is available.', and so this volumetric part should be defined as a new template wrt. the CVSMNI152 template/space (i.e. tpl-PS13_pet.nii.gz). However, for the surface-based stream we estimate and apply the registration from subject space to fsaverage, and then average across subjects. So the spatial transform between this new surface-based feature map and fsaverage is identity, and would not be defined as a new template, and so should instead be defined as a continuous atlas with a _pet.nii.gz extension (i.e. tpl-fsaverage_atlas-PS13_pet.nii.gz'). If one would estimate a parcellation on top of this, the filename would change to tpl-fsaverage_atlas-PS13_dseg/probseg.nii.gz). Right?  

I think I would be okay with this, and it would not conflict with prior templateflow work/distribution, but would impact the distribution of templates/atlases moving forward. I guess it might be slightly confusing that the same continuous PET data can be considered both a template and an atlas, and so the alternative would be to use the space entity (as you mentioned above), enforcing that space is present in the filenames if the new template does not generate its own coordinate system. Furthermore, I'd be inclined to still use the space entity in the volumetric stream case above, stating that the PS13 template now exists in CVSMNI152 space, similar to the fact that I think the tpl-MNI152 NLIN 6th generation should theoretically also have had the space-MNI305 part included. Then the PS13 data could be distributed as 

tpl-PS13_space-fsaverage_pet.nii.gz
tpl-PS13_space-CVSMNI152_pet.nii.gz
tpl-PS13_space-MNI305_pet.nii.gz
tpl-PS13_space-CVSMNI152_atlas-PS13_dseg.nii.gz

-    [`cohort-<label>`](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) is REQUIRED to disambiguate derivatives defined with

>      respect to different cohort instances.

Reviewer 2: I don't love this deletion, but if it makes the specs clearer, I'm happy to accept.

     Please note that [`cohort-<label>`](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) MUST NOT be used if neither

>      [`tpl-<label>`](../glossary.md#template-entities) nor [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities)
>      nor [`atlas-<labl>`](../glossary.md#atlas-entities) are used.

Reviewer 2: Two changes happening here:

1- I don't think cohort interacts with atlas in a way that the two entities are necessary. We should recommend that a derivative with atlas- defined indicates the specific space and cohort in the JSON sidecar.

2- the atlas- entity definition was moved up, and, as I indicated, I think it is best to define template, space and cohort, and then move on to atlas, seg, etc.

```suggestion
     [`tpl-<label>`](../glossary.md#template-entities) nor [`space-<label>`](../glossary.md#space-entities) are used.
-    [`atlas-<label>`](../glossary.md#atlas-entities) is REQUIRED to encode files pertaining
     or derived from the atlas identified by the entity's label.
```

Details about (1):

The atlas entity doesn't need space and/or cohort definition (unless you are looking at very specific problems such as the agreement of a single atlas' regions projected from different templates in which that atlas has been defined, and for that I would use desc-):

```
sub-01/
    sub-01_atlas-HCP_dseg.json  <- RECOMMENDED to add here this comes from MNI152NLin6 and cohort if applies.
    sub-01_atlas-HCP_dseg.nii.gz
```

In the case of template definitions, atlas MUST have a cohort defined, if the template has cohorts:

```
tpl-MNIInfant/
    cohort-1/
        tpl-MNIInfant_cohort-1_atlas-InfantAtlas_dseg.nii.gz
```

This leaves a related edge-ish case (independent of atlas): when you want to use the space- in a derivative and you must also note the cohort. I'm summoning @mgxd and @effigies here. What we are doing in this case is:

```
sub-01/
    sub-01_space-MNIInfant+1_T1w.nii.gz
```

Using + as a concatenating token. Perhaps this is a good place in the BEP to incorporate that `+` is RECOMMENDED in the `space-` label when cohorts are involved.

Reviewer 3: `+` is not yet accepted into BIDS. https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1926

-    [`seg-<label>`](../glossary.md#segmentation-entities) is REQUIRED when a single atlas has several different
     realizations (for instance, segmentations and parcellations created with different criteria) that
     need disambiguation.
-    [`scale-<label>`](../glossary.md#scale-entities) is REQUIRED to disambiguate different atlas 'scales',
     when the atlas has more than one 'brain unit' resolutions, typically relating to the area covered
     by regions.

The general filename pattern for subject-level derivatives with templates and atlases 
follows the general BIDS-Derivatives pattern:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<label>/
        <datatype>/

>             <source_entities>[_atlas-<label>][_space-<space>][_cohort-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>
>             <source_entities>[_tpl-<label>][_space-<space>][_cohort-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 2: This creates a lot of ambiguity, why would you need both tpl- and space-?

In BIDS-Derivatives, space can take values as `space-anat`, `space-native`, etc. indicating that the authoritative coordinate system (space) is the same subject's scanner coordinates. What is `sub-01_tpl-A_space-B_suffix` trying to say? If `sub-01_space-B_suffix` means that you moved `suffix` from `sub-01` into `space-B`, then, I'm finding it hard to understand what `sub-01_tpl-A_space-B_suffix` means.

The first line reorders atlas and space [+cohort], but it feels more natural to me to define the space first and second the atlas.

```suggestion
           <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_cohort-<label>][_atlas-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>
```

```

For derivatives of template- and altas-generating pipelines, which typically aggregate
several sessions and/or subjects, the derivatives-specific

> [`tpl-<label>` entity](../glossary.md#template-entities) and
> [`atlas-<label>` entity](../glossary.md#atlas-entities) are dual in terms of usage to BIDS raw's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`tpl-<label>` entity](../glossary.md#template-entities) is dual in terms of usage to BIDS raw's
```
This confronts the soul of my proposal:

sub <-> tpl are the two faces of the same coin, sub for individual, tpl for a group of individuals
session <-> cohort are the two faces of the same coin, subjects have sessions, templates have (not as close analog as the coordinate system, but still analog) cohorts.

atlas is special in that it represents a construct of prior knowledge with reference to a specific authoritative coordinate system.

        [cohort-<label>/]
           [<datatype>/]
               tpl-<label>_<source_entities>[_cohort-<label>][_atlas-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>

>                atlas-<label>_<source_entities>[_cohort-<label>][_atlas-<label>][seg-<label>][_scale-<label>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<extension>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

What is the use case? I'd like to see actual examples of this to see in practice. Also, I don't think you want to duplicate atlas in here.

Please note that the [`<datatype>/` directory](../glossary.md#data_type-common_principles) is RECOMMENDED.
The [`<datatype>/` directory](../glossary.md#data_type-common_principles) MAY be omitted in the case

> only one data type (such as `anat/`) is stored under the `tpl-<label>` directory.

Reviewer 4: This isn't germane to this PR, so let me know if I should move it to the discussion at bids-standard/bids-specification. 

I like the result of this, but I started trying to write some it out in the schema last night and began re-evaluating my initial thoughts. I guess it follows the same sort of logic as a session entity, so sure.

Reviewer 2: @bendhouseart perhaps you are looking at the wrong place? This is an alternative to my alternative to the BEP. In my alternative, the schema is updated with the specs (or should be).

https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1856

Please note that the [`<datatype>/` directory](../glossary.md#data_type-common_principles) is RECOMMENDED.
The [`<datatype>/` directory](../glossary.md#data_type-common_principles) MAY be omitted in the case
only one data type (such as `anat/`) is stored under the `tpl-<label>` directory.

> The [`cohort-<label>` directory and entity](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) MAY be specified for templates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`cohort-<label>` directory and entity](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) MUST be specified for templates
```
How can this be made optional?

with several cohorts.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`cohort-<label>` directory and entity](../glossary.md#cohort-entities) are dual in terms of usage to BIDS raw's
[`session-<label>`](../glossary.md#session-entities).
```

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {

>             "atlas-colin27_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: sub-01 should remain

Author: reverted

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {

>             "sub-01_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "sub-01_seg_head_mask.nii.gz": '',

Reviewer 2: This is plain BIDS derivatives, doesn't pertain to this BEP. Currently, masks have `label`, unless I am missing something or something changed while I was not looking.

```suggestion
            "sub-01_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "sub-01_label-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
```

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {

>             "atlas-colin27_res-1_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: this is neither an atlas or template at this stage, but still sub-01. When aggregating across subjects, this will be a tpl and atlas (for segmentation).

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {

>             "sub-01_res-1_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "sub-01_res-1_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto

```suggestion
            "sub-01_res-1_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "sub-01_res-1_label-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
```

   "mni152nlin2009casym-pipeline": {
      "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym": {
         "anat": {
            "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-eye_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-face_mask.nii.gz": "",

>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: I think tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-brain_mask.nii.gz is valid, given that the label entity is valid (https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/glossary.html#label-entities), which belongs to the template. I see the dseg parts as atlases.

Author: Good point. I've reverted these changes.

   "mni152nlin2009casym-pipeline": {
      "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym": {
         "anat": {

>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-eye_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-face_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto

```suggestion
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-eye_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-face_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
```

>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Okay, I think I understand how you would use atlas- at the front. Just because this is not a mask, but encoding more regions at once now it becomes an atlas. I think you don't want that. These are just segmentations of a template. I believe, a segmentation becomes an atlas when there's a rationale behind that partition of the space, typically because of some regional property of the brain.

tpl here is still giving the same information as above for masks. The change of data type is already given by the suffix. Adding here atlas is very confusing, especially because it now conflates the space designation id.
```suggestion
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
```

            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_T1w.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_T1w.json": "",

>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-eye_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-face_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto

```suggestion
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-eye_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-face_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-2_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
```

**Multi-cohort templates.**
In the case that the template-generating pipeline derives

> several cohorts, the file structure MAY employ the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
several cohorts, the file structure MUST employ the
```

               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_PD.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_T1w.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_T2w.nii.gz": "",

>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_desc-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto (thanks for catching that `desc-`  for that mask which is old and outdated)

```suggestion
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_label-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_label-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-1_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
```

               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_PD.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_T1w.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_T2w.nii.gz": "",

>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_desc-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto

```suggestion
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_label-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_label-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-1_res-2_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",
```

               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_PD.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_T1w.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_T2w.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_desc-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-1_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto, please roll back.

               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_PD.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_T1w.nii.gz": "",
               "tpl-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_T2w.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_desc-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_seg-CSF_probseg.nii.gz": "",
               "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_seg-GM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

>                "atlas-MNIPediatricAsym_cohort-6_res-2_seg-WM_probseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Ditto, please roll back

      },
      "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym": {
         "anat": {

>             "atlas-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            "tpl-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_res-1_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
```

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {

>             "atlas-AAL_dseg.json": "",

Reviewer: The sub-01 part should remain in the filename, to indicate that it belongs to sub-01

Reviewer 4: I agree with Martin on this it's too easy to overwrite other subject specific files without the `sub-<label>` remaining. Was this changed to make the sharing of a single subject atlas/template consistent with a multi-subject atlas/template?

Author: Reverted.

            "sub-01_atlas-AAL_dseg.nii.gz": "",
            "sub-01_atlas-AAL_dseg.tsv": "",
            "sub-01_atlas-AAL_probseg.nii.gz": "",

>             "sub-01_atlas-AAL_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
>             "sub-01_atlas-AAL_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer 2: Besides the label/seg discussion above. This example wants to exactly mean that the brain mask and the head mask WERE NOT projected from a template with those segments defined as part of the AAL atlas. Happy to add this clarification if necessary.

```suggestion
            "sub-01_label-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "sub-01_label-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
```

   "colin27-pipeline": {
      "sub-01": {
         "anat": {
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_dseg.json": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_dseg.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_dseg.tsv": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-MNI305_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_dseg.json": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_dseg.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_dseg.tsv": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_probseg.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_seg-brain_mask.nii.gz": "",
            "atlas-AAL_space-colin27_seg-head_mask.nii.gz": "",

>             "...", "",

Reviewer 2: You are losing here the notion that you are still in subject space. Definitely not a use case for atlas.

Please roll back.

For example, the [PS13 template](https://doi.org/10.18112/openneuro.ds004401.v1.3.0),
a molecular imaging brain template of Cyclooxygenase-1 (PET),

> was generated in two standard spaces: `MNI152Lin` and `fsaverage`.  Here, the use of 

Reviewer 2: I've reviewed up to this point. I will stop here and let's continue together on a call :)

Author: Thanks for the review, @oesteban.  I think a lot of my changes come from my misunderstanding of the intent of the proposal.  Looking forward to discussing and clarifying tomorrow.

   "ps13-pipeline": {
      "tpl-ps13": {
         "pet": {

>             "atlas-fsaverage_dseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: tpl-ps13_space-fsaverage_dseg.nii.gz?

Author: I'm not sure what the intent is here.  This file has been lifted straight from FreeSurfer and, while used during PS13 processing (to generate results at the ROI-level) it has not been processed/modified by the PS13 pipeline.

            "tpl-ps13_space-fsaverage_stat-std_desc-nopvc_pet.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-ps13_space-fsaverage_stat-std_desc-pvc_pet.json": "",
            "tpl-ps13_space-fsaverage_stat-std_desc-pvc_pet.nii.gz": "",
            "tpl-ps13_seg-fsaverage_pet.json": "",

>             "tpl-ps13_seg-fsaverage_json.tsv": "",

Reviewer: space-fsaverage?

Author: Actually I've removed these entierly.  They've been replaced by `atlas-fsaverage_dseg.nii.gz` and `atlas-fsaverage_dseg.json`

   "ps13-pipeline": {
      "tpl-PS13": {
         "pet": {

>             "atals-PS13_desc-nopvc_dseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: small typo in atlas. Is it clear from this that atlas belongs to the PS13 tpl and/or PS13 space?

Author: Fixed.

   "ps13-with-atlases-pipeline": {
      "tpl-PS13": {
         "pet": {

>             "atlas-Economo1916_desc-nopvc_dseg.nii.gz": "",

Reviewer: I would suggest to keep the tpl entity added to the filename, so the file can be shared as a standalone entity. Alternatively, make it clear that the various atlases now belong to the space PS13 (i.e. add space-PS13)

Author: I'm not sure I understand why it can't be shared as a standalone entity as is?  Regarding `space` entity.  I guess we should decide if `space` is REQUIRED when using atlas, or if it's only REQUIRED for disambuguaiton.
